hello everybody my name is J I'm one of
the expert IELTS teachers here at e to
language what we're going to do in this
live class is look at IELTS general
writing task 1 and we're going to focus
on the informal letter which you may get
there are three types and informal is
one of them more specifically I'm going
to show you what an informal letter
prompt looks like I'm going to show you
what an IELTS eight or nine model letter
looks like I'm going to talk to you
about structure flow vocabulary and
grammar and we'll finish by looking at
some top tips for writing high scoring
informal letters okay and everything
that we're going to do today is going to
be based on these weird-looking things
which are the criteria they are the
things that the IELTS examiner's look at
when they're marking your writing so
everything each language does is based
on these criteria we direct you towards
those higher scores based on what IDP
British Council and Cambridge University
do okay all right so let's start by
talking about the question prompt you
mention it's test day you open up your
book and this is what you see it says
you should spend about twenty minutes on
this task it also tells you some other
instructions down here it says write at
least 150 words you don't need to write
any addresses and it also tells you how
to begin your letter but this thing here
is critical right a friend we already
know that it's an informal letter a
friend who lives in another country has
invited you to come and stay with him or
her on your next holiday you are too
busy to accept the invitation write a
letter to your friend in your letter a
thank him or her for the invitation B
explain why you cannot come C ask him or
her about other times to visit it seems
pretty simple but there's a lot of
things that you need to do in order to
maximize your score here even if you're
a native English speaker and you can
write a fantastic letter there are some
real little tricks that you need to
understand
okay let's look at a model letter which
would be an eight or nine I'm not going
to read it to you because I'll read it
to you in detail in a second when we
look at it section by section but
certainly on your paper in front of you
or on the computer if you're taking the
computer-based IELTS this is what your
letter should look like I just want to
draw your attention to the three
distinct paragraphs that we talked about
a B and C right
this stuff's fine you can memorize this
sort of stuff here but this is the
critical thing that you need to focus on
here and you can see that it's distinct
separate paragraphs alright let's talk
about the structure each of those
paragraphs is based on one of the dot
points and what I have not done is mixed
my paragraphs together so dot point one
is based only on dot point one it
doesn't introduce information from dot
point two etc I've kept them kept them
clear and separate so how we start the
letter the first thing you do well here
it says dear Raja this is taken directly
from the instructions where it tells you
how to begin your letter dear editor
okay that's easy the first paragraph I
had to thank my friend Raja yard for the
invitation and actually this is kind of
difficult because I don't want to just
write one sentence on this dot point
because I need to keep my paragraphs at
about the same number of words so I
really needed to be imaginative and
think of different ways of to thank my
friend for the invitation so what I
wrote was thank you so much for your
invitation it's a really generous offer
to put me up at your place in Tokyo
remember he lives in another country I'd
really like to come and it's very kind
of you but unfortunately I won't be able
to make it due to my hectic work
schedule
okay so I've thanked my friend for the
invitation I've also made some sort of
connection to the second paragraph
I haven't mixed it because I have now in
the second one I need to explain why
I cannot come okay I've said in the
first paragraph that I've got a hectic
work schedule and now I'm going to
elaborate and extrapolate on that and
explain it in more detail I've just
started a new teaching job and I've been
working around the clock it's been
intense exclamation mark I don't mean to
complain I've been enjoying it immensely
and the school I'm working at is
actually our old high school which has
been a lot of fun do you remember mrs.
Brown she's actually my supervisor so
almost everything from this paragraph
relates to the reason why I cannot
attend third paragraph I need to ask my
friend about other times to visit could
you let me know of another time I can
visit because of the school holidays
I'll be free in the new year and I'll
also be free in winter so if you're
available then I'd certainly love to
escape the call to visit you and then I
sign off in a friendly way in an
informal way not a formal way I just say
something like I can't wait to hear from
you your friend Jay all right cool so
what we found with structure there is we
want to keep the paragraphs about the
same number of words we don't want to
mix our ideas between paragraphs it's
okay to sort of say something that will
introduce the next paragraph and you
also have to be imaginative in each of
these paragraphs so that you can
increase the size of them flow is also
very important and what flow means is
that each of the sentences that I write
link to the next sentence and link to
the following sentence and so on and so
forth and the way that we do this is
instead of inserting many different
ideas I take that single idea of
thanking my friend or explaining why I
cannot come and I elaborate on that
single idea okay and I push myself to
come up with different ideas related to
that single theme and if I can do that
I'm going to write much more interesting
paragraphs rather than just inserting
lots of random information this is a
really tough thing to be able to do okay
vocabulary is also critical so I've
highlighted some of the key vocabulary
here and you'll notice that very few of
them are single words because when we're
thinking about vocabulary were often
thinking about natural sounding phrases
collocations for informal letters
phrasal verbs etc okay so let's have a
look at some of the collocations
generous offer for example put me up at
your place that's a phrasal verb my
hectic work schedule there's a nice
collocation an interesting adjective of
hectic working around the clock is an
interesting phrase or an idiom almost I
don't mean to complain is a good phrase
enjoying it immensely is a good
collocation a lot of fun a good
collocation and then something
interesting happens down here I've said
I'll be free in the new year and I'll
also be free in winter so if you're
available then now it's okay to use the
same word once or twice but on the third
time I didn't want to write free again
so I changed it to the word available
even though that's a little bit more
formal than free I didn't want to repeat
the same word a number of different
times so just be careful if you are
repeating words again and again stop
think of a different synonym and use
that just to show off your vocabulary
range okay
and lastly certainly love to escape the
cold is a very nice phrase and escape
the cold is an interesting phrase in
itself so I've used a range of different
vocabulary and of course all of the word
forms are correct which is good okay
let's talk about grammar so what you
need to do in order to boost your score
is not just get the grammar
accurate but you also need to show a
range of different grammar and more
specifically you need to use a range of
different sentence types okay so you
might be a fantastic writer in English
but if you just write simple sentences
or compound sentences you're not going
to get a high school for grammar and
it's going to bring down your overall
average score as well so you really need
to think about inserting different
sentence types showing off the full
range of grammar that you have and the
different sentence types that you are
able to write for example some of these
sentences like I'd like I've used a
modal verb here you can also say I've
used a contraction instead of I would
and I'd do two so here this sentence in
fact is a really important sentence
because I've used a subordinate clause
due to my hectic work schedule I'd
really like to come and it's very kind
of you but unfortunately I won't be able
to make it due to my hectic work
schedule these kind of linking words
that create those sentences we have an
independent clause like a full sentence
but then another clause that sort of
hangs off it like due to my hectic work
schedule these are very important
there's a video that I did on these I'll
put it in the description below you
should watch that after this one because
if you do not use these types of
sentences in your essay and in your
letter the maximum score you get for
grammar is 4 okay you absolutely need to
consciously insert these sentence types
into your letter let me show you a few
more okay here's another one here which
has been a lot of fun there's what's
called the subordinate clause because
we've got the independent clause the
full sentence if you like and then the
part that hangs off it oops what else we
got
we've got one here as well I've started
a sentence with because and this also
creates one of those sentence types
because of the school holidays I'll be
free in the new year and I'll also be
free in winter so if you're available
then I'd certainly love to escape the
call to visit you this is a complex
sentence on a number of different fronts
first of all are views that because
conjunction
if conjunction I've used some modal
verbs this is an excellent sentence that
IELTS examiner's love because I'm
showing the full range of my ability
here for example I've written a question
form which is also fine as well so again
just to recap this grammar part it
doesn't matter if it's 100% accurate
that's only half of the trouble the
other half is that you need to show a
full range of different sentence types
you must consciously write various
sentence types into your letter okay
I can't labor that one enough okay so
let's look at some top tips for informal
letters then first of all you need to
plan before you write you don't need to
spend a long time planning but remember
what you don't want to do is mix your
dot points together you want to keep
those paragraphs separate so just stop
for 30 or 40 seconds right at the start
and think okay I need to use my
imagination do I have a friend that
lives overseas maybe I can use that as
an idea and then write to your plan you
should use the person's first name like
rod yard or Tom or John whatever not mr.
Smith you should start with a friendly
greeting like it's so great to hear from
you again
don't write I am writing to because
that's formal number four as we
discussed you need to give each bullet
point equal attention that means that
each PAP each paragraph should be
roughly the same number of words okay
number five you should use contractions
like I'd four I would and she's four she
is etc that's fine in informal letters
number six exclamation points are fine
you should try to write one into your
letter seven this is critical you need
to use your imagination number eight you
can use phrasal verbs in informal
letters like as we saw put up or get off
for example number nine you should avoid
formal connecting words like however
therefore as a result these are not
appropriate for informal letters what is
appropriate for informal letters
our words like so but etc those types of
conjunctions ensure so sign off in a
friendly way for example I can't wait to
see you not I look forward to hearing
from you okay so keep those top tips in
mind if you enjoyed this video and you
like what eetu language is doing please
click the subscribe button hit like
leave a comment and share this with your
friends the subscribe buttons just down
there and if you click the little bell
every time that we release a video
you'll be you're getting alert on your
phone so you can watch it straight away
that'll be cool and lastly if you need
some help with your IELTS maybe you've
failed a couple of times perhaps you're
just concerned because you think your
English might not be good enough check
out a two language comm where a hundred
percent online test preparation on the
platform we've got overviews methods
practice questions mock tests grammar
lessons etc off the platform you can
take one-on-one tutorials with expert
arts teachers and in some cases X IELTS
examiner's you can join our daily live
group classes on IELTS reading IELTS
writing task 2 etc and you can also get
feedback on your writing including your
letters what you do is you write your
letter on the platform on e to language
comm you submit it one of our expert
teachers will assess it send it back to
you tell you exactly what you're doing
right and tell you exactly what you're
doing wrong then you can go ahead and
take a tutorial and focus in on that if
you need to cool I think that's all
there's the website there WWE 2 language
comm thank you very much watching hope
it was helpful remember you probably
need to practice this stuff what I'm
teaching you is just a theory so do put
pen to paper or fingers to keyboards and
do some of this practice thank you
[Music]